Convert data-tiling write-ups into blog posts. (#20184)
openxla/iree: docs/website/docs/community/blog/posts/data-tiling-with-encoding-specialization.md

---
date: 2025-03-06
authors:

>   - hanhanW

Reviewer: This needs an entry in https://github.com/iree-org/iree/blob/main/docs/website/docs/community/blog/.authors.yml

Otherwise the website fails to build:
```
(.venv) λ mkdocs serve
INFO    -  Building documentation...
INFO    -  Cleaning site directory
ERROR   -  Error reading page 'community/blog/posts/data-tiling-with-encoding-specialization.md':
ERROR   -  Couldn't find author 'hanhanW'

Aborted with a BuildError!
```

For example:
```yml
  hanhanW:
    name: Han-Chung Wang
    description: Software Engineer
    avatar: https://github.com/hanhanW.png
    url: https://github.com/hanhanW
```

Produces this: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/96319539-4cc9-4624-b9bd-acc3f3bd18c4)

Docs: https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/plugins/blog/#config.authors_file

categories:
  - Performance
tags:
  - CPU

> ---

Reviewer: You could override the "read time" estimate if you want, like is done here: https://github.com/iree-org/iree/blob/0ba36bf30aad747f25960b66e61d8a98d24342bd/docs/website/docs/community/blog/posts/microkernels.md?plain=1#L9

(the estimate for this post is 25 minutes right now)

Docs:
* https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/plugins/blog/#config.post_readtime
* https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/plugins/blog/#meta.readtime

> # How data-tiling works with encoding specialization

Reviewer: I would add a paragraph of text here to introduce the topics and set up some motivation for the rest of the post.

Then, put a marker like this:

```
<!-- more -->
```

as is done here: https://github.com/iree-org/iree/blob/8e574a9350e906841996aa9f6ad9e4180b2d88e4/docs/website/docs/community/blog/posts/tflite-tosa.md?plain=1#L12-L23

That sets the point for "Continue reading" on https://iree.dev/community/blog/. Docs for that: https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/plugins/blog/#config.post_excerpt_separator

## Setup

Test source program: dynamic matmul_f32.mlir:

> ```mlir

Reviewer: Note that our website does not yet have MLIR syntax highlighting. We can try to prioritize that to make these posts prettier and easier to read. Some notes on that are buried in https://github.com/iree-org/iree/issues/5477.

func.func @foo(%lhs: tensor<?x?xf32>, %rhs: tensor<?x?xf32>) -> tensor<?x?xf32> {
  %c0 = arith.constant 0 : index
  %c1 = arith.constant 1 : index
  %M = tensor.dim %lhs, %c0 : tensor<?x?xf32>
  %N = tensor.dim %rhs, %c1 : tensor<?x?xf32>
  %cst = arith.constant 0.0 : f32
  %init = tensor.empty(%M, %N) : tensor<?x?xf32>
  %fill = linalg.fill ins(%cst : f32) outs(%init : tensor<?x?xf32>) -> tensor<?x?xf32>
  %op = linalg.matmul
      ins(%lhs, %rhs : tensor<?x?xf32>, tensor<?x?xf32>)
      outs(%fill : tensor<?x?xf32>) -> tensor<?x?xf32>
  return %op : tensor<?x?xf32>
}
```

Compile for zen4 CPU target:

```mlir
iree-compile \
  --output-format=vm-bytecode \
  --iree-hal-target-backends=llvm-cpu \
  --iree-llvmcpu-target-cpu=znver4 \
  --iree-llvmcpu-target-triple=x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu \
  --iree-global-opt-enable-early-materialization=false \
  --iree-stream-experimental-specialize-encodings \
  ~/matmul_f32.mlir -o ~/matmul_f32.vmfb
```

Note that we have to disable the early materialization. Otherwise, the encodings are resolved way before specialization.

## Walkthrough

> Full Log: https://gist.github.com/hanhanW/df11ad072e40cbb776307c503dbc8f45

Reviewer: From the pre-commit check (https://github.com/iree-org/iree/actions/runs/13710096163/job/38344576810?pr=20184#step:4:187):
`MD034/no-bare-urls Bare URL used`

```suggestion
Full Log: <https://gist.github.com/hanhanW/df11ad072e40cbb776307c503dbc8f45>
```

Or you can add `[link text like this](https://some/url)`. Tips for choosing link text: https://developers.google.com/style/link-text

    %1 = hal.buffer_view.dim<%arg0 : !hal.buffer_view>[1] : index
    %2 = hal.tensor.import %arg0 "input0" : !hal.buffer_view -> tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %1}
    %3 = hal.buffer_view.dim<%arg1 : !hal.buffer_view>[0] : index
    %4 = hal.buffer_view.dim<%arg1 : !hal.buffer_view>[1] : index
    %5 = hal.tensor.import %arg1 "input1" : !hal.buffer_view -> tensor<?x?xf32>{%3, %4}
    %6 = iree_encoding.set_encoding %2 : tensor<?x?xf32> -> tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding>
    %7 = iree_encoding.set_encoding %5 : tensor<?x?xf32> -> tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding1>
    %8 = tensor.empty(%0, %4) : tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>
    %9 = linalg.fill ins(%cst : f32) outs(%8 : tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>) -> tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>
    %10 = linalg.matmul ins(%6, %7 : tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding>, tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding1>) outs(%9 : tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>) -> tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>
    %11 = iree_encoding.unset_encoding %10 : tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2> -> tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %4}
    %12 = hal.tensor.export %11 "output0" : tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %4} -> !hal.buffer_view
    util.return %12 : !hal.buffer_view
  }
}
```

### Outline dispatches

> There are four dispatches in tatal. `dispatch_0` packs the LHS operand, `dispatch_1` packs the RHS operand, `dispatch_2` is `fill + gemm`, and `dispatch_3` unpacks the result of matmul.

Reviewer: (may want to run spell check on the whole file)
```suggestion
There are four dispatches in total. `dispatch_0` packs the LHS operand, `dispatch_1` packs the RHS operand, `dispatch_2` is `fill + gemm`, and `dispatch_3` unpacks the result of matmul.
```

Author: The languagetool is not useful because there are blocks. I also checked with vim built-in spell check, and it looks better now.

#### IR dump after the pass

```mlir

> // -----// IR Dump After OutlineDispatchRegionsPass (iree-flow-outline-dispatch-regions) //----- //

Reviewer: These are pretty large code blocks. If you want to highlight something in particular, you could add line numbers and/or line highlighting

For example, adding
````
```mlir linenums="1" hl_lines="18-27"
````
here produces this code block: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2ae86f6a-e21c-4a84-a60e-f89bbd660303)

(Yes, syntax highlighting would be nice too 🙃)

Docs:

* https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/code-blocks/#adding-line-numbers
* https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/code-blocks/#highlighting-specific-lines

    %5 = hal.tensor.import %arg1 "input1" : !hal.buffer_view -> tensor<?x?xf32>{%3, %4}
    %6 = flow.dispatch @foo_dispatch_0::@foo_dispatch_0[%0, %1](%2, %0, %1) : (tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %1}, index, index) -> tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding>{%0, %1}
    %7 = flow.dispatch @foo_dispatch_1::@foo_dispatch_1[%3, %4](%5, %3, %4) : (tensor<?x?xf32>{%3, %4}, index, index) -> tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding1>{%3, %4}
    %8 = flow.dispatch @foo_dispatch_2::@foo_dispatch_2[%1, %3, %0, %4](%6, %7, %1, %3, %0, %4) : (tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding>{%0, %1}, tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding1>{%3, %4}, index, index, index, index) -> tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>{%0, %4}
    %9 = flow.dispatch @foo_dispatch_3::@foo_dispatch_3[%0, %4](%8, %0, %4) : (tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>{%0, %4}, index, index) -> tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %4}
    %10 = hal.tensor.export %9 "output0" : tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %4} -> !hal.buffer_view
    util.return %10 : !hal.buffer_view
  }
}
```

### ConvertToStream

The flow executables all become stream executables, and the function arguments become opaque types which are `stream.binding`. At the Stream level, it does not need to know anything about Flow.

> The host code are mostly about `stream.tensor.sizeof` and `stream.tensor.dispatch`. The `sizeof` op takes a tensor type with an optional encoding. It indicates the storage buffer size that will be used to issue the allocation later on. The `dispatch` op describes how we call the functions in the program.

Reviewer: I have some grammar and formatting nits about this paragraph but I'm okay with including the post with minimal copy editing too. What would you like to do?

Suggestions:

```suggestion
The host code is mostly composed of `stream.tensor.sizeof` and
`stream.tensor.dispatch` ops.

* The `sizeof` op takes a tensor type with an optional encoding and indicates
  the storage buffer size that will be used to issue the allocation later on.
* The `dispatch` op describes how we call the functions in the program.

```

Before:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c9fd3f09-e992-4199-a8d3-019b77660660)

After:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/634b0da4-4413-4c35-a908-a6c15a6efa2c)

    %15 = stream.tensor.dispatch on(#hal.device.affinity<@__device_0>) @foo_dispatch_2::@foo_dispatch_2_matmul_DxDxD_f32[%1, %5, %0, %6](%11, %13, %1, %5, %0, %6) : (tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding>{%0, %1} in !stream.resource<*>{%10}, tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding1>{%5, %6} in !stream.resource<*>{%12}, index, index, index, index) -> tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>{%0, %6} in !stream.resource<*>{%14}
    %16 = stream.tensor.sizeof on(#hal.device.affinity<@__device_0>) tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %6} : index
    %17 = stream.tensor.dispatch on(#hal.device.affinity<@__device_0>) @foo_dispatch_3::@foo_dispatch_3_unset_encoding_RESULT_DxD[%0, %6](%15, %0, %6) : (tensor<?x?xf32, #encoding2>{%0, %6} in !stream.resource<*>{%14}, index, index) -> tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %6} in !stream.resource<*>{%16}
    %18 = stream.async.transfer %17 : !stream.resource<*>{%16} from(#hal.device.affinity<@__device_0>) -> to(#hal.device.affinity<@__device_0>) !stream.resource<external>{%16}
    %19 = stream.tensor.export on(#hal.device.affinity<@__device_0>) %18 : tensor<?x?xf32>{%0, %6} in !stream.resource<external>{%16} -> !hal.buffer_view
    util.return %19 : !hal.buffer_view
  }
}
```

### Specialize Encoding

> There are few key operations in the IR. They are catogirzed as Stream tensor ops. They all have the `IREE::Stream::TensorPhase` trait. The SpecializeEncoding pass uses the `encoding` attribute from the executable_target to resolve the layouts for the encodings. In this example, the attribute is `#iree_cpu.cpu_encoding_layout<>`. The attribute implements [the device encoding layout attribute interface and host encoding layout attribute interface](https://github.com/iree-org/iree/blob/main/compiler/src/iree/compiler/Codegen/ExternalInterfaces/CPUEncodingExternalModels.cpp). E.g., Before the specialization, only the op information is encoded. After the specialization, the layout is resolved into a serialized IR. In this example, they is a dictionary attribute representing the [MaterializeEncodingInfo struct](https://github.com/iree-org/iree/blob/d7c6c7bae479324676eb3b25234a312581d9350c/compiler/src/iree/compiler/Codegen/Dialect/Codegen/IR/IREECodegenTypes.h#L85-L96).

Reviewer: grammar "they is a" --> "that is a"
```suggestion
There are few key operations in the IR. They are catogirzed as Stream tensor ops. They all have the `IREE::Stream::TensorPhase` trait. The SpecializeEncoding pass uses the `encoding` attribute from the executable_target to resolve the layouts for the encodings. In this example, the attribute is `#iree_cpu.cpu_encoding_layout<>`. The attribute implements [the device encoding layout attribute interface and host encoding layout attribute interface](https://github.com/iree-org/iree/blob/main/compiler/src/iree/compiler/Codegen/ExternalInterfaces/CPUEncodingExternalModels.cpp). E.g., Before the specialization, only the op information is encoded. After the specialization, the layout is resolved into a serialized IR. In this example, that is dictionary attribute representing the [MaterializeEncodingInfo struct](https://github.com/iree-org/iree/blob/d7c6c7bae479324676eb3b25234a312581d9350c/compiler/src/iree/compiler/Codegen/Dialect/Codegen/IR/IREECodegenTypes.h#L85-L96).
```

could also break this paragraph into some ordered or unordered lists or add some line breaks... or keep as-is. I don't feel too strongly, but it's a bit dense:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/26e1c222-d0d3-4b5e-9878-d91472e30cb4)
